Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
Tellerik create compelling app experiences
across any screen with the
Tellerik platform Telerx end to
end platform. Uniquely combines industry
leading UI tools with cloud
services to simplify the entire
app development cycle Tellerik offers
everything.net developers need to build
quality apps faster. Try it
free at tellerik.com/platform that's tellerik.com/platform
From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
a weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing a
show number 513. In this
episode, Scott talks with next
game CTO, Kylie. Hito a
lot about what it's like
building and scaling a mobile
game to millions of users.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hanselminutes today. We're talking with
next game CTO.  how
are you? Thanks. Pleasure to
be here. Yeah. Thanks for,
thanks for chatting with me.
And you stayed up late
for me and I appreciate
that. No worries. So a
couple of years back next
games, the mobile game company
that you worked for raised
like $6 million in starting up,
right. And becoming the next
big mobile game company and
fast forward to 2016 and
the walking dead game is
a certified hit. Isn't it?
Well, yeah, so it seems
like at least we were
really pleased with the success
that we have been seeing
with the game. So at
least on some level it's
a heater. You sound very,
you sound very modest. Is
it a, is it hard
to judge whether a game
is a hit or not?
Yeah, that is a bit
of the depends so much
where you compare it to,
if you convert to the
big names, we're still way
behind them. But then again,
if you just compare like
general level of how games
are full, we were doing
really well. And of course
it's the finished way of
actually not being too proud
of anything. It's a people
really, you don't run around
and just going, Hey, I've
got a hit game. Woo.
Now we're like, yeah, we're
somewhere there. Maybe somewhere shouting
about it. So when you,
when you publish a game,
when you, when you hit
publish, where you all sitting
in a room, like the
entire company is like in
the main common room and
you hit publish and you
say it's live, or was
it just something you did?
And then you went home?
Well, We actually did gather
the getter, especially on our
first game. We, we, we
do have Duquesne's the initial
first game was the compass
blood West, which is a
battle builder game. And that
was like our first, first
one to come out. It
was last sprint that we
bought and especially doing that
because obviously being the first
of the company, we were
all gathered in our meeting
room and just population all
together and the launch, the
game. And then we started
to wait until they actually
went live, drew out the
Apple store and started to
see how people started to
come in, did the game.
And we were lucky enough
to get to featuring, and
actually thanks to we had
tent. We had some spare
time before we actually launched
the game during that day.
And our addicting was thinking
like, what, what can we
do a lot? We have
done all the preparation that
we can, everything should be
set up and everything was
doubled, triple checked. So we
came up with this idea
that let's, let's create this
word map that will show
live every player that comes
alive as adults. So we
can visualize how players are
pouring in. So we ended
up watching that word map,
which we call it the
world domination map the whole
evening. And it was pretty
nice because you could actually
see how players when the
featuring went out on different
countries or an app store.
So you could see how
people start pouring in from
UK. And then there's a
pouring in for us. And
so on. Like the time
zone is always  and,
and for the walking dead,
we do pretty much the
same, although we weren't all
in the same room, we
would go to the game
because we were a bit,
a bit out here and
there in different locations, some
of us were having some
lodging. First of all, first
of all, it is in
New York. And most of the
company was here in Helsinki
watching how the game was
published. And then few of
us were in Redwood, actually
sitting at the Microsoft office.
Wow. Okay. So you were
all over the world and
watching this, this live globally
in different. Yeah. So when
you hit publish, do you
know that it's lie like
that? When do you know
it's live? Do you sit
there on the app store
and just hit refresh or
do you wait for it
to be featured? And when
you got featured, is that
just luck or do you
have some relationship with Apple
that makes sure that it's,
It's featured it's, it's mainly
like, obviously we tried to
communicate with Apple about like
how to have some sort
of conduct. They're not saying
that we are launching game
and of course, like PR
and everything like that helps
there, but it's that there's
no magic to it traditional
way of like, they, they
make their own decisions and
there's nothing we can basically
do about it. And the,
I understand that when, when
apps get launched, when mobile,
when mobile games get launched,
sometimes you'll become popular in
a country randomly. And you
don't know, like you'll just
be sitting around like suddenly
we're huge in Malaysia. And
you don't know why that
happened. Have you noticed as
a particular country or part
of the world that just
loves playing the walking dead?
No, man's land more than
another. I should probably check
from the data. I believe
there were some odd countries
and especially shows when you
were looking at the countries
that are spending most money
and then you can be
some very old ones or
very small ones that are
like, when you compare the
amount of spending money to
the amount of players you're
getting like Switzerland is surprisingly
good. Seems like those guys
have a lot of money
or something like that, Or
a lot of money to
spend on equipment for there.
Yeah. Other people it's not
like raising crazy amounts, but
it's compared to something else
it's, you can see that
some Congress are better, but
I know that, for example,
on the first weekend, of
course the United States was in
the top, but also Thailand
apparently loves this game. Yeah.
There was a lot of
players coming in from Thailand.
And I can't remember what
other countries were the biggest
ones, obviously U S was,
was the biggest one that
we went to do number
one during the time. Hmm.
So in the first weekend,
there's over a million downloads
and it was the number
one app in 12 countries,
number one free game and
13 countries. And the number
one role playing game in
117 countries. So this is
a big deal. And apparently
the best part was that
50 million zombies were, were killed
in that first weekend. Yeah,
that's quite a lot. Would
probably take me a lifetime
to do that by myself.
So the, the thing that
I thought was interesting about
this is that you mentioned,
of course, just now that
you were at, at Microsoft,
but you're not really a
Microsoft shop. You're not necessarily
a shop that identifies yourselves
as a Microsoft shop, right?
Well, no, we, we don't
need to define ourselves as
any specific company that we
will be using those. Just
let some companies technologies, we
more like look into what
would be just the easiest
way or most effective way
of getting things done. And
for us, it meant do
use Microsoft in the backend
solutions. Although we do use
some, a bit of Amazon
and we do use a
bit of Google, but mainly
mainly on Microsoft systems. And
then when we were creating
our client's side, it's all
done on unity. So, So
yeah, like most companies that
I've heard that are successful,
a hybrid cloud strategy is
the way to go. You,
like you just mentioned the
three major clouds and you've
got, you know, a little
bit on all of those
on all of those. Yeah.
Yeah. Well obviously like 90%
of everything is on Microsoft
cloud, but there still is
a little bit, bit bitter
parts on other cloud providers.
It's just like all the
cloud providers have like their
best benefits sort of thing
that they can offer offers.
Or there's like, if you
compare some of the technologies
that Google or is providing
culvert to Microsoft, there's obviously
something that Google is better
than Microsoft is vice versa.
So on the first weekend,
we'll just use the first
weekend as an example, apparently
31 million minutes were played just
on that opening weekend alone.
So I can assume now,
you know, fast forwarding from
October when this came out
to now, months later, we're
looking at billions and billions
of transactions that are going
on. How did you decide
where to put that? Is
that, did you say when
you were starting, we're gonna
use a no sequel database
or did you try it
and in my SQL or
SQL server and then say,
this is not really a
good idea for our persistence.
Well, the decision to use
CQL and go with no
SQL solution was, was done
pretty early on. I didn't
actually even consider using SQL
because my previous line of,
of job, I had my
battles with SQL servers and
trying to scale them and
do my experience. Data is
just a simple escape, simply
data data, just scale. And
especially when we were, when
we started to talk about
like large amount of users,
they're fine on dialect hundreds
and thousands. But when you
get more of that, more
than that, they just didn't
do break it up. And
it sounds like, You know,
scaling it and sharding and
all the kinds of stuff
one has to do when
you're doing SQL. That's not
interesting. You want to make
really good games and really
you just want to move
the slider bar and have
the no SQL database. Yeah.
That's, that would be the
optimal situation, obviously at the
moment. It's not quite there
yet. We are using Azure
table storage's, which are pretty
dude in providing scalability. But
for example, if you want
to sharp and more than
your initial shot, you need
to do a complete data
migration. I see. So with
table storage, it's a big
deal to go and change
your existing sharding. Yeah, it
is. Okay. We learned that
the hard way. Well, and
this is, what's good about
this kind of conversation is
you find out what's the
hard way and what's the
easy way. Cause things sound
like they're easy initially, but
then there's there's technical debt
that builds up what you
use as your document DB.
Then the Jason based, no
SQL solution versus table storage
for Document DB is mainly
used for fast churches. So
we store basically the same
data in Dayville starches and
also in DP. But we,
we, we delay the saving
for the document DB and
also we use aggregate tables
there to create faster cherish
searches. So yeah, the lack
of indexing in Dale's storage
is, is forcing us to
use some solution that our
document DB was pretty open.
I'm all for it. So
when you've got, when you've
got like millions or hundreds
of thousands, millions of users
online at the same time,
how, how chatty is this?
Like, there's all the little
transactions you make as you
upgrade your people or as
you go out and you
battle, are you just sending
a constant stream of, of
data into the back end
and letting it chew on
it? Or are there smarts
in the game itself that,
you know, that batch these
things up and send aggregate
data back? Well, client isn't
that smart in a sense
he does send Lego. We,
we do send a comat
every time you do a
change in the game that
needs to be reflected into
the game model or in
the state of the player.
But what we do is
we actually cache these players
on the front servers. So
instead of pushing every change,
always back into the database
table storage, or instead we
give them a memory in
cash and we just keep
on talking with the client
directly from the cash. So
it's really faster basically in
one big victory, old layers
that are on that server
instance. And we always store
the player into the, versus
the data storage when the
player disconnects or the server
goes into the sharp Indonesia.
I see. So you're pushing
data into that, that edge
cache, that front end cash.
And then you flush it
effectively when the person either
has timed out and disappeared
or they formally left the
game. Yeah. That's basically what
we do, they seem to
fly Is that, of course
everything's simplified. Is that like
a Reddis cash or your
own memory, and you just
said it in memory dictionary,
or are you using an
out and out of a,
out of the box or
an open source memory caching
system, like Reddis We are
using just it's in a
memory dictionary at the moment
we looked into using reddish.
The problem was that we
were unable to get actually
any good performance numbers out
of radius. At least when
we talk with, with Microsoft
and ask like, what's the
performance on their ready solution?
No one came up and
gave us like exact numbers.
They were it's fast. How
fast? Interesting. Well, it's fast.
Okay. Like benchmark numbers, right?
Because you're thinking about things
in terms of, of milliseconds,
right? You don't want, you
can't do, you're doing work
that you can't wait a
second or two seconds for
something to happen if you're
thinking about any member. Yeah.
And also because we were
handling our modals, played a
modals in Jason, so we
would have you use ready.
We would, every time need
to basically sterilize that model
somehow to be able start
to be ready. And the
most costly thing that we
do on the servers is
actually serializing the model back
and forward from Jason and
or a license to commands
or anything that happens there.
And these are revising stuff.
So when we actually stored
them as a memory object,
there's no need for serialization
because they're already there. So
that is a huge performance
benefit that we get from
using any memory. Gosh, is
that Yeah. You know, I
think, I think that's really
interesting. That's something that has
come up in my experience
over the last 20 years,
doing all kinds of before
it was Jason, it was
XML. And before it was
XML, it was CSV. But
you'd be surprised that when
you get a really tuned
system and you start getting
latency down to nothing, serialization
comes up as the number
one thing that your application
ends up doing. And then
you have to ask yourself
how badly do I really
want to serialize this? Yeah.
We noticed that, that, that
is actually the number one
thing that is using our
resources at the moment is,
is serializing. So we are
obviously always looking into options
that could be used other
ways of serializing than Jason,
for example, wrote the path
or a message back, but
they all have their drawbacks.
And obviously also it's very
important that those things are
serialized, same way. Like the,
the data that we want
to serialize the object we
want to Sarah, last time
Sarah left the same way
also on unique clients that
want our model. So we
have to be really careful
what we use for Sheryl
laceration. Right. And are you
on Android now as well?
Yeah. So you're on Android
and iOS is that those
are the two, my main
clients. Yeah, those are right.
And you want to make
sure that that, that serialization
works everywhere, but you also,
I assume as you evolve
the game, as you add
new features, you want a
reasonably flexible schema because there
might be new features that
you add to a Guild.
And you've also got people
on different versions of the
game who might not all
update at the exact same
time. And if you go
and serologic protocol buffers, or
you start thinking about serialization,
then you have to manage
serialization and versioning serialization. Yeah.
That day And a bit
of a fecal to handle
it. I actually, at the
moment we don't support players
with different versions. At least
they cannot have like a
big difference in, in the
version number. Oh, okay. The
client would force me to
update if it found I
was too far back. Yeah.
It will say that you
need gloves, but that's just
since otherwise creating all the
necessary migrations and making sure
that they work would be
too much of a hassle.
We focus mainly on grading
migrations instead of new features.
And we want to keep
refreshing the game and keep
it fresh for the players
all the time. So W
when you're doing these kinds
of different queries against the
backend system, how many, how
many queries are when it's
a user thinking about the
things that are in the
user's world versus major aggregating
data, like high score leaderboards
that are the entire country,
or, you know, scores by,
you know, grouping, like all
the people on Facebook and
all the people in Thailand
and things like that, you
know, there's different. I guess
what I'm saying is that
there's different key characteristics as
you're playing the game. There's
the things that I care
about, my guilt things about
versus the things that my
country thinks about versus the
global leaderboard. Well, actually the
leaderboards themselves don't do that
much work at all. We
have a pretty nice leader
of artist and debt that
is created in a way
that we can have infinite
amount of leaderboards and the
game itself can decide what
kind of leader boards they
want to use for the
back back. And doesn't actually
care what kind of leader
boards you have. So if,
if the game team decides
to have a new leader
board with some, like, based
on, if you would like
to have like leaderboard for
health, for a blade from
Helsinki, they could do it.
There's no limitation to it.
That's DB, which we use
to generate our leaderboards. And
then the player data, it's
actually pretty simple in a
sense it's for, for the,
for the server or the
player is just a bunch
of text basically. And also
also a model that inherits
a base model and the
server only understand base model.
And it has very few
methods into it. So from
the server point of view,
things are really symbol. And
like, if we create new
features, it doesn't usually need
a lot of  the
server team to actually implement
them because everything is so
generic. We handle all the
commands that the, that the
client Cindy in, they're all
just Jerry last, Jason, and
for the server, there's a
serialized, Jason that's happened to
implement an interface and we
then just shove it. Doll
did the model and the
model manager and the model
manager handles the execution of
that command on the server
side. So for us, everything
is just strings on the
server side. Nice. So in
this world of cloud-based scalable
games in 2016, how much
do you have to think
about scale? Right. I think
when the marketing people sell
us the cloud, they tell
us that, Oh yeah, you
don't have to think about
it at all. But you
know, computer science is computer
science. So somewhere between you
don't have to think about
it at all. And you
have to think about it
constantly. You know, reality is
in the middle somewhere. And
I'm curious in the real
world, how much are you
sweating scale? Well, I've led
to say not that much,
but then actually starting to
starting and how much I've
been thinking about that at
the past week, it's been
quite a lot. So does
that vary week by week,
you will eat dust depending
on what's delight. There's always
some issues as there is
with any system. There's always
some issues. And depending on
which issues issue happened to
be solid, but for us,
it's, it's like, yeah, in
a sense, we already did
all the farts that affect
scaling up. We did the
sharding, we have the caching.
So the foundation is there
and we have the glove
tools that helps us do
the scale. But then you
can abuse those in a
sense that if you start
thinking like, Oh, it'll just
scale. But then we noticed
that we are actually, each
player is like several megabytes
of Jason because he little
scale and we didn't pay
attention how much data we
were actually putting into a
player save. He doesn't actually
skate anymore. So then the
marketing spirit just don't affect
anymore. So that kind of
things you have to think
about and be careful that
as you go along and
level the game, you don't
recreate the kind of problems.
So in a sense, you
need to think about it,
but if you relate to
a foundational, well, it's really
pretty scared at the pretty
easy not to get into
any sort of scaling problems.
Do you think that there's
a, the scaling issues are
really a matter of how
much money you're willing to
spend versus how much you're
able to scale? Because I
assume that you could hide
architectural flaws by just paying
lots of money and scaling
to the, the highest level,
you know, on any cloud,
right. You just throw CPU
at it. So is it
a balance between how much
engineering work we want to
spend to affect much money
we spend each month? Well,
actually drawing a CPU in
a sense like scaling up
is something that we are
not using a scalability factor.
We look more into like
how many players we can
support simultaneously on one server
instance. And then we just
have to make sure that
the system works as we
add those instances. So we
scale out and they're in
that scanner area. You cannot
actually hide that much of
your architecture depth if you
didn't do it well, a
scaling up in a sentence.
If, if you just draw
more CPU or bigger instances,
then you get basically high
some of the floors. But,
but I wouldn't say that
would be the same thing
for the, for scaling out
and making sure that you
can actually truly scale in
a sense that as you
add more instances, your scaling
will just multiply by the
number of instances. I see.
So when you decide as
a company, as a team,
how many people you want
on one server, did you
just kind of figure that
out? Or how did you
know, like, is it a
thousand or 10,000 or some
number and you go, yeah,
that seems like a good
number now we'll scale out
instead of up. Well, no,
we actually did a pretty
much a load testing. So
we did a, quite a,
quite a bit of that.
We used the visual studio
online for that, which is
really easy to just create
tens of thousands or hundreds
of thousands virtual users. So
what we did, we created
a unit desk that was
also using single arm mutual
use for productivity to the
back end. And basically it
was, we, what we did
was we recorded the commands
that we sent during a,
a normal glacier straight out
of unity. And then we
played back that with the,
the unit test. And then
we launched that drew the
visual studio online load test
harness, which then I believe
it's can these days generate,
it used to be 50
agents that it could generate
a 50 different instances of
virtual machines now 200 or
something like that. So we
used that to bombard our
load test environment. And from
there, we could see when
we were actually spiking on
CPU and what's the perfect
level for how many players
we could support for on
each instance. Okay. And then
once you've got that, that
number, do you auto scale
out or do you have
a team that makes a
decision to scale? We do.
We have set, set all
the scaling on, but most,
most of the times happening
by decision from the team.
So we have a continuous
monitoring of the situation and
alerting system. And of course,
on, on call personnel that
will immediately take action. If
we get an alert, that
CPU is burning somewhere. So
then you could, you know,
let's say that you were
on the news or Oprah
mentions, Hey, I love walking
dead, no man's land. And
then everyone rushes it'll scale,
you know, cleanly and the
people who are playing the
game, won't notice There's a
rush of people basically. Yeah.
That would be the situation.
Fantastic. So then let me
ask you this, now that
you've got that infrastructure created
for this game, the next
game, how much can you
use what you've learned and
what you've built to make
the next massively multiplayer game?
Just Work that much easier.
Well, everything, the way we
build the system, it is
it's actually built in a
way that eat can be
used by any game. So
we are actually using it.
The first game is using
the same system, the compass
blood waste as the walking
dead. So he could basically
host any game that just
happens to obey, do our
interface. All right. So then
next games, next game can
be using this backend and
then it's intellectual property that
you could sell or license
to someone else and they
could use it Back end
in theory. Yes. Yeah. Most
likely our next game we'll
use the same backend system.
It has some pretty good
benefits. Like it's basically, well,
I wouldn't say it like
deep poof, but it's really
hard to cheat on. So
because everything is run on
the server, we run the
whole game model and the
server and the model is
deterministic. So whatever happens as
Azure will happen on the
client and vice versa. Right.
I think that people have
decided that even though I
cloud on the iTunes side,
like iCloud game saves is
not exactly that the best
way to do things. If
people can log in via
Facebook or Google or their
game center ID. And I
can go from my iPhone
to my iPad and back,
and my game just feels
persistent that this is a
model that people who play
mobile games want. Yeah. That's
definitely something that you can
do with our games. We,
you can basically blade on
simultaneous knee while simultaneously, but
you can share the same
game on your iPad or
iPhone or even your Android
device. Yeah, absolutely. I like
being able to roam with
any game. And I think
that if I have to
go and synchronize saves and
things like that. So I
think that the model for
these massively multiplayer games or
games that can move from
mobile device to mobile device
where the server is, like
you said, is running the
game model on the server.
It has all sorts of
benefits. Like you said, less
likely to have people cheating,
but not having to think
about, you know, models, synchronization
as well. Yeah, because it's
it's yeah. The synchronization is
really simple. The server is
always right. We don't trust
anything that the client actually
says. For example, if we
send a command that you
call it, like in the
walking dead, you call it
the tomato cans. Instead of
from the client, like
collect five Harvard can't. He
just sends a command from
the client, which is first
executed on the client against
the model of the client
saying that collect all available
cash from this building. And
then it runs on the
server and does the same
thing. And that'll update the
number of available tomato cans
that you have in the
game on both sides. But
the model itself actually decides
how much. So if you
drive the cheat, eventually when
you drive to use those
cans, there will be a
command that will use certain
amount of cans, but it
will fail on the server.
But because it didn't have
the amount of cash that
your client thought it would
have, if you have a
jailbreak device that you could
basically go dinger with the
data I see. So the
authoritative source is, is the
server and that prevents these
kinds of issues. Yes. Very
cool. Well, I really appreciate
you taking the time to
chat with me today. Ah,
what's happened to beer, So
make sure to check out
next games and you can
go look at the walking
dead. No man's land on
iTunes and on the Android
store. This has been another
episode of Hansel minutes and
we'll see you again next
week.